Details 

  Crystalis 

  SNK - Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) - 1990 

  (Played via port to Nintendo Switch) 

Rating  

  8 Stars out of 10 possible 

Summary 

  Crystalis is an early 90's RPG game by SNK, originally created for the NES but later ported to the Gameboy Color in 2000. Similar in scope to other similar games of the time such as The Legend of Zelda or Star Tropics, Crystalis is a fantasy adventure game where the player can slay monsters, acquire items, explore a multitude of different environments, and experience a story.  

  In Crystalis, the player takes control of an unnamed protagonist that wakes up in 2097 after the “END DAY” in 1997. Since then the world has changed, and many animals and people have mutated into monsters. The surviving members of humanity created a giant floating tower to escape the ravaged earth and to help prevent the apocalypse from occurring again. The player’s role, with the help of his companion Mesia and four wise sages, is to defeat the antagonist, Draygon, who seeks to overthrow the tower. 

  The player has access to a multitude of useful tools to aid them on their journey. Initially the player acquires the Sword of Wind with assistance from the wizard Zebu, but later acquires the swords of fire, thunder and water from three additional wizards- Tornel, Asina and Kensu. The elements associated with these weapons are very important, as certain enemies can only be slain with certain weapons and certain obstacles can only be cleared with the correct element. The player can spend currency earned by slaying monsters at shops located in each town to acquire stronger armor, shields, and consumable items such as healing herbs and poison antidotes. Spells can be acquired from the game’s four wizards and are equipped in a similar way to a weapon. They can offer a wide range of helpful effects such as the health-restoring Refresh spell or the projectile-blocking Barrier spell. Slaying monsters also gives the player experience points that eventually level up the character, increasing health and attack power each time. These three principal systems- combat, character advancement, and item acquisition- solidify Crystalis’ place in the RPG genre and make it an exciting and rewarding game to play. 

 

Final Thoughts 

  Crystalis was an enjoyable game for me to play. While I didn’t grow up playing 2D NES games, I’ve always been a fan of RPG games, especially those in fantasy settings, so it was an easy transition for me to make. Crystalis satisfies the itch to adventure and slay dragons, which I seek when playing many other fantasy RPGs. I usually enjoyed the vague directions that encouraged me to simply explore and discover things for myself. The game is relatively straightforward in terms of its gameplay, but I also enjoyed the restrictions that were placed on me regarding the swords of different elements. Early in the game the player is required to wake a sleeping character with a special flute, which is only briefly hinted at when talking to a random NPC in the starting town. This kind of investigation is satisfying to solve and adds depth and intrigue to the game. 

  While my opinion of Crystalis is mostly good, there were a few things that made the game frustrating to play. Chief among these was the fact that instructions are sometimes completely absent and are only solved by going elsewhere to find the item or NPC that you needed. For example, there are ice barriers in the Mt. Sabre area that can only be broken with the Sword of Fire- a fact that, to my knowledge, is never explicitly or implicitly stated- you simply must explore elsewhere to find it. This kind of feature was frustrating to me, though it would have been mitigated with even a vague direction such as “your current sword is not hot enough to melt this ice!” In addition, there was very little indication of an enemy being immune to an element- you had to either guess or hope that you had the correct sword. 

  Overall, I enjoyed my time playing Crystalis and, in fact, it may now be one of my favorite NES games. 

 

Additional Information  

  A review from 2010 that I found interesting and insightful that also covers the 2000 Gameboy Color version: 

  https://web.archive.org/web/20100329035716/http://www.hardcoregaming101.net/crystalis/crystalis.htm 
